                          RICH DAD POOR DAD
 Question page 1 - 10:
1. What are the differences between the rich dad and the poor dad?
2. what are their similarities?
3. Who do you think is the author's biological father ?
4. What do the two dads most strongly disagree about?
5. why is the financial gap getting bigger?
6. what are the examples consequences of the lack of financial education?
7. How does the author feel about financial education?
9. how does the rich dad prevent his mind from getting lazy?
10. what is the difference in the two dads' attitude towards taxes? explain
11. Explain why one dad said: " My house is a liability, if your house is your largest investment, you are in trouble "
12. Why do you think the author decided to listen to the rich dad?
13. What kind of school did the author attend after grade 6?
13. Why did the two friends want to make money at such an early age?                

Day1: I read the Introduction:RICH DAD POOR DAD page 1+2:
        ----the answer of question 1 :-----
       The differences between the rich dad and poor dad are their carrers, their advice given to children, their thought about everything in life , their habit and
their actions in their life, the power of their thought 

Day2: The Introduction: page 3+....+the end of Introduction :
       ----- answer of quest 2:-----
            Their similarities were successful in their lives, working hard, strong, charismatic,influential and respect for education and learning 

Day3: Read all the Introduction again*2 :
      -----answer of quest 4:------
          Two dads most strongly disagree about the same course of study and what they thought was important to learn 
      -----answer of quest 5:-----
          Because it depends on their financial skills on their money 
      -----answer of quest 6:-----
          The examples consequences: - cause the distance between the rich and the poor people 
                                     - affect their action and their thought
                                     - smart bankers, doctors and accountants who earned exellent grades may struggle financially all of their lives.....
      -----answer of quest 7:-----
          The author feels that financial education is very important and necessary in our lives because it will help us know more about the finance
      -----answer of quest 9:-----
          the rich dad always keep his mind by exercising it everyday so it helps his mind get stronger 

Day4 : Read again:
      -----answer of quest 10 :-----
          the difference in the two dads' attitude towards taxes : One dad thought that the rich should pay more in taxes to take care of those less fortunate
                                                         The other said, “Taxes punish those who produce and reward those who don’t produce.”
      Explanation: Because they had opposing attitudes and that affected the way they thought.
                   OR may be one dad is very poor and the other is very rich so it affect their thought
     -----answer of quest 11:-----



     -----answer of quest 12:-----
           Because it would help the author to be rich, to understand how money works, and many skills which isn't taught at school\
     -----answer of quest 13:-----
           Private school after grade six
      -----answer of quest 14:-----
          Because thier friend told them weren't invited to the beach house cause they were poor 


Day5: Read from Chapter 1: 
 questions page 10-15:
1. How did the mother feel about their collecting toothpaste tubes? Provide reference
2. Which of the two fathers drove up with a friend?
3. How did he feel when he first saw the production line?
4. How did he feel after he understood what the boys were doing?
5. Did people often frequent Mike’s house, according to the author? Provide reference
6. How did the author feel when he visited Mike’s house?
7. What was the difference in the two dads’ first appearance? (not the look, but how they were first mentioned)

       -----answer of quest 1:-----
            i need time 
