                          RICH DAD POOR DAD
 Question page 1 - 10:
1. What are the differences between the rich dad and the poor dad?
2. what are their similarities?
3. Who do you think is the author's biological father ?
4. What do the two dads most strongly disagree about?
5. why is the financial gap getting bigger?
6. what are the examples consequences of the lack of financial education?
7. How does the author feel about financial education?
9. how does the rich dad prevent his mind from getting lazy?
10. what is the difference in the two dads' attitude towards taxes? explain
11. Explain why one dad said: " My house is a liability, if your house is your largest investment, you are in trouble "
12. Why do you think the author decided to listen to the rich dad?
13. What kind of school did the author attend after grade 6?
13. Why did the two friends want to make money at such an early age?                

Day1: I read the Introduction:RICH DAD POOR DAD page 1+2:
        ----the answer of question 1 :-----
       The differences between the rich dad and poor dad are their carrers, their advice given to children, their thought about everything in life , their habit and
their actions in their life, the power of their thought 

Day2: The Introduction: page 3+....+the end of Introduction :
       ----- answer of quest 2:-----
            Their similarities were successful in their lives, working hard, strong, charismatic,influential and respect for education and learning 

Day3: Read all the Introduction again*2 :
      -----answer of quest 4:------
          Two dads most strongly disagree about the same course of study and what they thought was important to learn 
      -----answer of quest 5:-----
          Because it depends on their financial skills on their money 
      -----answer of quest 6:-----
          The examples consequences: - cause the distance between the rich and the poor people 
                                     - affect their action and their thought
                                     - smart bankers, doctors and accountants who earned exellent grades may struggle financially all of their lives.....
      -----answer of quest 7:-----
          The author feels that financial education is very important and necessary in our lives because it will help us know more about the finance
      -----answer of quest 9:-----
          the rich dad always keep his mind by exercising it everyday so it helps his mind get stronger 

Day4 : Read again:
      -----answer of quest 10 :-----
          the difference in the two dads' attitude towards taxes : One dad thought that the rich should pay more in taxes to take care of those less fortunate
                                                         The other said, “Taxes punish those who produce and reward those who don’t produce.”
      Explanation: Because they had opposing attitudes and that affected the way they thought.
                   OR may be one dad is very poor and the other is very rich so it affect their thought
     -----answer of quest 11:-----
      one dad said: " My house is a liability, if your house is your largest investment, you are in trouble
       Because there are many people come around you and let you invest in their liabilities. you will be 
               annoyed when there are many people around until you invest in any liability so you must be 
               careful when your house is your largest investment.
     -----answer of quest 12:-----
           Because it would help the author to be rich, to understand how money works, and many skills which isn't taught at school\
     -----answer of quest 13:-----
           Private school after grade six
      -----answer of quest 14:-----
          Because thier friend told them weren't invited to the beach house cause they were poor 


Day5: Read from Chapter 1: 
 questions page 10-15:
1. How did the mother feel about their collecting toothpaste tubes? Provide reference
2. Which of the two fathers drove up with a friend?
3. How did he feel when he first saw the production line?
4. How did he feel after he understood what the boys were doing?
5. Did people often frequent Mike’s house, according to the author? Provide reference
6. How did the author feel when he visited Mike’s house?
7. What was the difference in the two dads’ first appearance? (not the look, but how they were first mentioned)

Day6: Read Chapter 1:
      -----answer of quest 1:-----
            The mother grew distressed as the weeks wore on. Finally she put her foot down.
      -----answer of quest 2:------
               Dad of author drove up with a friend
      -----answer of quest 3:-----
           He just smiled and shook his head 
      -----answer of quest 4:------

 Day7: Sorry for not reading anything 
 Day8:Read the Title:" the rich don't work for money, they make money work for them"
      -----answer of quest 4:-----
            He felt so proud of two boys at nine ages when they can make an idea to make money 
      -----answer of quest 5:-----
            Yes, they did. There are many employees work for Mike's father so they may go to his house for working
            Reference: 
    I looked around the room and didn’t see Mike anywhere. Feeling awkward, I cautiously sat down next to the same two women who were there four weeks earlier. They smiled and slid down the couch to make room for me.
     Forty-five minutes went by, and I was steaming. The two women had met with him and left 30 minutes earlier. An older gentleman was in there for 20 minutes and was also gone.
      -----answer of quest 6:-----
           He felt 
      -----answer of quest 7:-----
          The difference between two dads : Rich dad was mentioned as a person who only graduated from secondary school but he could understand and control the financial and money
                                            Poor dad was mentioned as a person who graduated from many famous high school but he always had trouble with the money and the finance

  Day 9:Read chapter 1:
   RDPD - questions 16-20
1. What was the first lesson the two boys learned?
2. How does Robert (the author) feel about dusting off the canned goods? Provide reference
3. How does Robert feel about his wage? Provide reference
4. How did Robert’s opinion of Mike’s dad change? (not what made it change)
5. According to Mike’s dad, what do people do when life pushed them around?
6. According to Mike’s dad, what stopped scared people from taking chances?
     
 Day 10: Read chapter 1:
      -----answer of quest 1:-----
           The first lesson two boys learned was being able to know when to make quick decisions that is important
            
 Day 12: Read chapter 1 :
      -----answer of quest 2:-----
           Robert feels excruciatingly bored about dusting off the canned goods.
As he said they had spent three hours taking canned goods off the shelves,brushing each can with a feather duster to get the dust-off, and then re-stacking them neatly.
      -----answer of quest 3:-----
           He was not excited in his wage.Since he said he had worked as a slave and the wage is not too much , his wage was only 3 comic books.
      -----answer of quest 4:------
           Robert’s opinion about Mike’s dad completely changed. First, Robert though Mike’s dad is a crook, greedy and don’t care of his employees. After discussing, Robert realized that Mike’s dad was right. He was blaming Mike’s dad and he did ask to learn, he was fighting

Day 13: Chapter 1: 
      -----answer of quest 5:-----
           According to Mike’s dad , when life pushed them around :
              - some just let life push them around
              - others get angry and put back
               - a few learn the lesson and move on
       -----answer of quest 6:-----
             According to Mike’s dad, the fear of losing was greater than the excitement of winning stopped scared people from take chances

Day 14:Next chapter 1:
     RDPD - question 21-25
1. What does the phrase “talk until I was blue in the face” in page 21 mean?
2. How did the rich dad teach the boys the first lesson about life?
3. According to rich dad, is fear a part of true learning? Provide evidence
4. According to rich dad, why do most people learn to work for money?
5. What kind of questions did rich dad ask the author in page 24?
6. What kind of answers did the rich dad give to the author in page 25?
     
