Lesson ....: Crispr
1.what is this?
  It stands for:
        clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
  it is a gene-editing technology that allows scientist to:
          precisely cut DNA
          remove or disable genes, or 
          insert new genetic information 
origin: 
It was discovered in bacteria , which use it as a natural defense system to protect themselves from viruses. Scientist adapted this system into a powerful tool for editing genes in plants animals and humans

naive : you think like children 
cash9 locate on dna
      cut the dna
      edit them 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
8/12 : we live in a simulation theory
1.what is this?
      it suggest that everything we see touch, feel , and experience might not be the "real world", but a computer -generated simulation created by an advanced civilization 
   this idea isn't new.many philosophers throughout history have asked similar questions

1.ancient roots of the idea 
 plato- allegory of the cave : 
       -people live chained inside a cave
       - they only see shadows on a wall
       - they believed the shadow are reality 
       - in truth, the shadows are just projections from objects behind them 

quark 

blastick bag                 thump 
backage                      indect finger
jar\ lid                      middle finger 
jeogds                        fing finger 
tissue paper                  pinky
spoon
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
15/12: Gender roles
 1.what is this?
   it referes to the social constructed expectations about how indivisuals should behave, think, and act based on their gender
   these roles are shaped by culture, traditors, religion, education , and history, rather than biology alone
---Traditionally, societies assigned different responsabilities to men and women , oftne linking gender to specific ,duties, occurpation and behaviors
 -----simple explanation: are the rules society creates 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
18/12: Lesson : 
Part1: car engine basics
     - is a machine that converts fuel into movement
     - most traditional cars use an internal complusion engine (ICE)
I. components of a car engine: 
A.belts
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
22/12: Lesson: how weath change people 
1 what is weath?
  weath is the ability to afford multiple options, make choices freely, and access opportunities that others can't.
 It includes not only money but also assets, time freedom and scoial capital.
   Does weath make people happier, or doesn't create more problem
2.Some change: 

when you are rich there are 3 person
   1, people who wish to destroy you
   2, people who is jealous of you
   3, your mother and father
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
29/12: CIVILIZATION
-stable food supply         : every body need food to eat the same
-permanent sellements       : means the house 
-governance and law         : it needs a social
-economic system            : the ability to trade for food drink
-technology and knowledge   : can be st like fire
--shared culture and values : 
-security and defense       : 
   fucc 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
5/1: HISTORY
  ACIENT EGYPT - stability through control 
acient egypt, one of the first long-lasting civilizations
egypt's power came from geography, 
Many believe that the best way to ensure a happier society is to reduce the difference between in income earnings between the rich and poor
  I agree.Because if making the gap between rich and poor smaller, it can help people feel happier, feels fairer and less stressful.
 When everyone has a more equal income, people feel more happy and can help each other. because everyone is equal, there 's no war, so people 
 can live longer and happier. However, happiness also comes from things like good health,freedom and education.
 So, income equality is helpful, but it is not the only factor that makes all of us happy.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
8/1 : WORLD WARS
I.world war 1( 1914-1918): the system breaks
1.long term causes (structure)
 a,militarism
 euro powers built massive standing armies and believed war was ineviable 
america: 

Test 1: The development of the silk industry
----doan1:the use of silk by the king
silk: st to make cloth
reserved for = kept for 
exclusively = only
close realtion= family 
 dignitaries = people with money and power
robe : a long jacket
principle wife = main wife = first laddy
                other wife = mistress
heir to the throne = the sun who will take the throne
throne: where the king sit

----doan2: use of silk in production
Chinese society began wearing tunics of silk
 production of musical instruments
 decoration, industrial use
fishing and paper
garments = underwear

----doan3:used of sislk by normal people
dynasty : the time of a king 
ceased to v = stop + ving
mere = simple
fabric = a material
servants : people who work for no money or little money
subjects = servants
outstanding = very very good
major= big
thoroughly  = carefully
so....that : den muc ma
so that: de ma
component = a part of st
precious  = really valuable
commodity = st that keep value over time >< security
seek = look for=  very wanted by
mummy = zombie 
evidence = proof = a way to show st 100%
ambassadors = someone to go and talk 
 bearing gifts = caring gifts
monks = the student of buddha
threat = risk = danger
invasion = what china did to vietnam
seal = cloth
manuscripts = books 
banners = 
 textiles = clothes
caves = small area in the mountain

-currency
-pay tax, pay servant, reward subjects, value=kg <- increase production 
-language character
-commodity
- mummy hair: earliest evidence of trade
-gifts
-manuscripts, paintings, silk ,banners, textiles , caves
--------------------------------------------------------------
12/1: 
people shoould plant more trees in open spaces in towns and cities
-> open spaces in towns and cities should be decorated with more trees
because trees clean the air -> cleaning the air is considered to be main reason
for example, TB has more trees than HN -> HN is seen to have fewer trees than TB
So TB has fresher air than HN ->  fresher air is enjoyed by TB people

Many poeple believe that open spaces in towns and cities should be decorated with more trees along the streets.
As a matter of fact, cleaning the air is considered to be main reason why trees are so valuable. for example, HN is seen to have fewer trees than TB.
fresher air is enjoyed by TB people.

It is bad for people to put their personal infromation online for purposes such as signing up for social networks or online banking
->  personal information is bad to be put on syber space for purposes such as registering for social networks or online banking
->  personal information should not be put ........
Because it is not safe
-> security is not outdated/ defended/ advanced enough 
so personal information can be used for bad purposes
->  so personal information would/ can be put in danger/ stolen/ attacked/ leaked/ breached 
for example , we can lose a lot of money because hacker can steal our information and take our money from the bank
->  money from the bank can be hacked as our private data can be stolen by hackers/ threat actors
so we should not put our personal information online
-> the internet/cyber space is not a ladnscape our personal information should be made available. 

LESSON: CYBER FINANCIAL CRIME 
it is one of the fastest growing threats in vn and around the world.
this lesson explain the current situation, tool used by hackers, recent incidents, and the reasons behind rising cybercrime

1.the current cyber landscape in vn
VN is experiencing a rapid digital tranformation
cyber : internet 
cyber landscape : what 's going on the internet today
cyber security: police internet
fliper zero 
pineapple
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15/1: 
doan 4: USE TO erope
startled by the bright silken banners -> run in public
Yet, within decades Chinese silks were widely worn <-- the rich and noble families of Rome.
The Roman Emperor Heliogabalus (218-222 AD) wore nothing but silk : romane emperor
which was oneconfined to the nobility, has now spread to all classes without distinction --> everyone has silk
The desire for silk
war -> roman soldier scared of white banners -> fled                  <----
-> decades , emperor wore silk -> rich ppl -> everyone -> desire for silk/ \

doan 5 : 
silk production -> korea
cultivation of the silkworm --> india

doan 6 : silk go to middle east
-->two monks : high silkworm egg in bamboo walking sticks
-->started to make silk -->  church and state monopol --> cheaper normal silk than chines 
undercutting : cheaper than price
. But higher quality still expensive in the west  --> persian --> italy --> all europe

doan 7: 
world production *2. china * japan--> 1970, only china

NEW WORLD
undercut a market = sell at a lower  price 
 approximately = a lower or a bit 
fled = run away 
panic = fear


LESSON: 
1. would i let my kids run around the neighborhood unsupervised? : don't care
2. would i trust the education system wholeheartedly? 
3. would i tell my kids that hard works guarantees a stable life?
4.would i let my kid develop common sense with friends - or force traditional common sense early?
                             (the sun is yellow)
core philosophy : main idea
roam = run 
SHOULD THE SCHOOL TEACH CHILRDEN PRATICAL SKILLS OR JUST ACADEMIC KNOWLEDGE?
  Schools should also teach practical skills such as money management, communication, and basic life skills for daily living.
  Practical skills help students become independent and confident in real-life situations.
  Learning both academic and practical skills helps students be better prepared for future jobs.
  Therefore, schools should teach both academic knowledge and practical skills to give students a balanced education.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
19/1 : history of high tech

TEST 2: The Clipper Races: an era of competition between cargo ships
------During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the British East India Company had the monopoly on trade with China and India. This meant that because no rival could legally import tea or other goods from these countries at this time, the company was rarely in a hurry to transport its merchandise. Instead, its priority was to minimise costs by carrying as much as possible on each ship. This meant that its ships - known as East lndiamen - were enormous, strong and very slow.
     (East india company :monopoly: china and india-> no rival-> no need to be fast-> minimize cost )
------By 1800, the average East lndiaman could carry 1,200 tons of merchandise. The trading pattern for China tea usually meant the East lndiamen set sail from Britain in January, sailed round the Cape of Good Hope at the southernmost tip of Africa, and arrived in China in September. There they would load up that year's tea harvest, set off again and, depending on the wind and weather, aim to arrive back by the following September. So even with favourable sailing conditions, the round trip lasted almost two years, and if anything went wrong it could take a lot longer.
      trip 2 Years : jan:britain-> sep:china->next sep:britain(wind and weather) 
------However, by 1834 the company had lost its trading monopolies, and tea had become a freely traded item. Having no more use for its great ships, the company sold them off, and many were bought by merchants or their captains, who continued to plough the seas between Britain and China. But now that tea could be traded freely, a few smart sailors began to realise that whoever brought each new harvest of tea to Britain first, stood to make the most money.
      loss of monopoly-> EIC sold big ships-> captain + merchans-> fast->
------This was partly because if you were home first, you could sell your shipment of tea before your competitors even arrived, and partly because consumers in Britain in the nineteenth century believed that the fresher and earlier-picked the tea, the better the resulting drink. Tea traders now needed faster, sleeker ships to bring their precious cargo back. Nevertheless, in Britain this idea only caught on slowly, and while the 1840s saw a few faster ships launched, for the time being many merchants remained satisfied with the slow but reliable East lndiamen.
      opportunities<- british though that earlier picked/ fresher tea=better drink-> faster. But idea caught on slow-> still use EIC
------In fact it was the Americans who pioneered the first clipper ships. These vessels were fast and slender, with a narrow hull that was deeper at the back than at the front and masses of sails on tall masts. They earned their name from the way that they clipped off journey times British merchants resolved to build their own clippers to rival the Americans and the first British tea clipper, Stornaway, was built in Aberdeen in 1850 More tea clippers were designed and built in Britain throughout the 1850s and 1860s, they had a narrower beam than their American equivalents, making them less powerful during storms, but faster in calmer weather.
       clipper: smaller ships…..:in America-> britain( stornaway); less power in storm , faster in calm
------There was a great spirit of competition between the British and American ships plying the tea trade, but to begin with the Americans had the edge. Then in 1851 a British ship owner, Richard Green, built the aptly named clipper Challenger, with the stated intention of beating the American ships. Loaded with tea, Challenger left China for London in 1852 at the same time as the American clipper Challenge, a much larger, older ship, already greatly admired for its speed. Large sums were bet on which would complete the journey first. In the event, the British ship beat its rival to London by two days, amid much jubilation. From then on, such international races grew in popularity.
       competition: at the beginning American-> bristish : challenger-> challenger vs challenge ->( older larger)-> challenger : 2 days
 ------After 1855, American participation in the British tea trade gradually stopped. But even without the Anglo-American rivalry, the competitive spirit continued. It was really ignited when new ports were opened up for trade in China. These included Fouchow, which was much closer to the tea-producing areas than Canton, the port used previously. As a result, tea could be loaded onboard earlier and fresher, and the clippers could set off in late May or early June - sometimes not even taking time to fill out the official paperwork - racing back to Britain whatever the difficulties.
       after 1855< no more American-> competition still continue-> new port Fouchou( old port: caunton)-. Load faster and fresher( smtime no official paper work)
 -------They sped down through the South China Sea and into the Indian Ocean, then raced to get round the southernmost tip of Africa at the Cape of Good Hope. Then it was north across the vast Atlantic, past the Azores, through the English Channel and into the estuary of the River Thames. Once there, they would be towed by tugs, up the river and into the docks.
       New group: south china sea-> oidian ocean->cape of good hope ( Africa)-> atlantic-> river thames-. Town by tugs into ducksNew group: south china sea-> oidian ocean->cape of good hope ( Africa)-> atlantic-> river thames-. Town by tugs into ducks
 -------The cargo of the winning ship could earn a premium of up to sixpence per pound-and so the captain and crew were rewarded by the owners of the cargo. But the races were about more than just money the crews, about 40 men on each clipper, were expert sailors, proud of their ships, and they delighted in competing against each other. Without their enthusiasm, the races would never have happened, since getting the ship home as fast as possible required the crew to be totally dedicated and to sacrifice much of their rest for the duration of the race. 
        cargo of winning ship: sixpence per pound, > competition was more than just money 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
22/1: Who Profits From Whom
1. the poor work for money - survival as a system
  leverage: sth you can use to get better result
  long term planning : u only have to 
  capital accumulation: 
  Cruelty:
  oppression:
  intermediaries:
  villains:
  revenue:
  billable:
  volatility:
  monetized:
  rebellion:
in modern society, the poor primarily exchange time and physical or mental labor for immediate income 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
26/1: venezuela
1. What Happened (Confirmed Developments in the first 3 days of 2026)
• U.S. forces conducted a large-scale military operation in Caracas, Venezuela’s capital, capturing President Nicolás Maduro and his wife, Cilia Flores. The raid involved elite U.S. special forces and airstrikes targeting Venezuelan military sites. 
• Maduro and Flores were flown to the United States and appeared in federal court in New York on charges including narco-terrorism and cocaine trafficking, part of a superseding indictment unsealed after their capture. 
• The U.S. government has indicated it may maintain influence over Venezuelan policy and secure access to Venezuela’s vast oil resources. 
• The legality of the operation is under intense international scrutiny; critics including the UN Secretary-General describe it as setting a dangerous precedent under international law. 
• Allies of Venezuela such as China have condemned the action as “unilateral bullying” and a violation of sovereignty. 
• Switzerland has frozen assets linked to Maduro and associates in response to the arrests. 

central banking mechanisms and sovereignty arrangements :
airstrikes: special use in fighting
target : focus on
federal court : a court is a room where people talk and talk who is right who is wrong 
                federal means national
indictment: a paper say you are wrong
unsealed : open
scrutiny: nagative feedback
condemned : confirm you 're wrong
sovereignty. : freedom of the country
precedent : st that happen before / example from the past

WRITING: 
   step 1:  Effect on pepople living in cities: 
-more ppl --> increase house price --> no house to live
-expensive education , hospitals -> bad health 

  step 2: There are 2 mains effects on pppl living in these cites. firstly . more ppl will lead to an increase in house price. when that happens, ppl will have no house to lie in
secondly, education in these cities is very expensive. also hospitals are also expensive , so ppl have bad health

 step3: fix 
  2 big effects on ppl who live in those cities are seen often 
firstly , if more ppl go to big cities the price of houses will increase
ppl who don't have enough money will have no house to live in 
secondly, educcation in these cities is often considered very expensive
also, hospitals which are very expensive can make poor ppl have bad health

step 4: paraphrase
  2 detrimental impacts on city drewlers are more than often observed. 
firstly, were the number of immigrantsto increase housing market would respond with huge swing to te uptside
as a consequence, those who are less fortunated will have no choice but to be homeless or live without permanent accommodation
secondly, education in such rural ares is often deemed to be out of reach = impossible  = beyond the budget for the majority of the population 
furthermore, hospitals which are usually too costly can become a great barrier between the poor and good health care

-------What can be done to maintain the quality of life of people?
1.idea: 
- decrease living cost -> cheaper house for ppl to buy
- move hospital /university to smaller cities -> ppl move there -> fewer ppl -> less expensive
- control birthrates -> fewer babies-> fewer ppl -> less expensive

The cost of living can be reduced if cheaper houses, which are more affordable for people, are provided.
Hospitals and universities, which are usually built in big cities, should be moved to smaller cities if population pressure is to be reduced.
If public facilities are relocated, people will be encouraged to move, which will result in fewer residents and lower living costs.
If birth rates are controlled, fewer babies will be born, which will lead to a smaller population and lower expenses.

==> The quality of life can be improved if the cost of living is reduced, which can be done if cheaper houses, which are affordable for people, are provided
    Hospitals and universities, which are often built in big cities, should be moved to smaller cities if overcrowding is to be reduced
    If these facilities are relocated, people will be encouraged to move, which will lead to fewer residents and lower living costs
    Finally, birth rates should be controlled if population growth is to be limited, and if fewer babies are born, living expenses can be kept stable.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
29/1: International information
 1. Why International Organizations Exist at All
International organizations emerged primarily after World War II, when global leaders concluded that uncoordinated nation-states competing economically and militarily had twice destroyed the world, and that some form of permanent cooperation was necessary to reduce conflict, manage trade, stabilize health crises, and rebuild trust.
The core assumption behind these institutions was simple but ambitious:
If countries talk regularly, share rules, and cooperate through institutions, they will be less likely to fight.
However, these organizations were built by states with unequal power, meaning their rules, funding, and enforcement mechanisms often reflected the interests of the strongest members rather than neutral global needs.

3. World Trade Organization (WTO)
History
The WTO was established in 1995, evolving from the post-war General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), with the goal of preventing the protectionist trade wars that contributed to the Great Depression and World War II.
Mission
The WTO aims to promote free trade, reduce tariffs, and provide a rules-based system to resolve trade disputes peacefully rather than through retaliation or war.
What WTO Did Right
• Lowered global tariffs/ import tax 
• Expanded international trade but in wto
• Provided dispute-settlement mechanisms
• Integrated developing economies into global markets
For decades, global trade growth coincided with reduced interstate war.
Major Mistakes and Failures
The WTO assumed that free trade benefits would be evenly distributed, which proved false.

Critics argue it:
• accelerated deindustrialization in some countries very fast - big country  
• weakened labor protections
• struggled to adapt to digital trade and state capitalism
• became paralyzed as major powers ignored rulings

Structural problem:
The WTO has rules, but no real power to enforce them against strong states.
Lesson:
Rules without enforcement work only while everyone believes in them.

WRITING: even though globalization has some very positives effect, we can't forget it negative effect. what are the disadvvantages and advantages of global
globalization has been a topic of discussion for many years. while some people think it brings many benefits such as economic,  and a few drawbacks such as . i believe that globalization brings both benefits and drawbacks that need to be carefully considered. 
Globalization brings many advantages, which help countries develop economically. More jobs are created, and modern technology is shared among nations, which improves people’s quality of life. If globalization is well controlled, international cooperation will be strengthened and living standards will be raised.
However, globalization also has disadvantages. Local cultures, which are closely connected to national identity, may be lost, and the environment can be seriously damaged. If strict laws are not enforced, natural resources will be overused and pollution will be increased.
In conclusion, some may consider globalization to be beneficial because  it promotes economic growth and cultural. However, i am inclined to support the idea that it causes more disadvantages Because when it was established, globalization was making our humanities wore and worse
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2/2: Law
1. conract law
-law: set of written or unwritten rules that are enforced by the government
-contract: enforceable agreements/ promises
2.sources of contract law
-common law
-criminal law
-precedents
-constitution ( highest law in a country)
3. what are the requirement for a contract? 
agreement: offer and acceptance
- consideration: something of value (quid pro quo)
- legality
- capacity: not under duress, not crazy, not under 18*….
- proper form 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
5/2: Writing task 1
the given line chart depicts different causes of contaminant from 1990 to 2005 in the UK
Overall, air pollution such as households and industry tended to decrease significantly. Meanwhile, population from transport had an up trend.
Especially, in 1990, total air pollutants peaked at approximately 7 million tonnes.

Regarding industrial pollution, a clear downward trend can be seen. In 1990, emissions stood at approximately 7 million tonnes, before declining steadily over the period to about 3 million tonnes in 2005.
Meanwhile, pollution from transport increased slightly at first before decreasing towards the end of the period. 
In contrast, household emissions remained relatively low throughout, finishing at under 2 million tonnes.

=> Paragraph 3:
Big trend → start → change → end
   Paragraph 4:
Link word → trend 1 → comparison → trend 2
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
9/2: TEST 38:
Listening:
Reading:
Writing:
The line graph illustrates changes in the weekly consumption of four types of meat and fish in a European country between 1979 and 2004, measured in grams per person.

Overall, chicken consumption rose steadily to become the most popular by the end of the period, while beef and lamb showed clear downward trends. 
Fish, by contrast, remained the least consumed food throughout and declined only slightly.

At the beginning, beef was the most widely eaten meat at just over 200 grams per person per week, despite some fluctuations in the early 1980s. However, its consumption fell markedly after the late 1980s, dropping to a little above 100 grams by 2004. 
Lamb followed a similar but less dramatic pattern, decreasing from around 150 grams at the start to roughly 60 grams at the end.

In contrast, chicken intake increased consistently over the 25-year period. Starting at about 150 grams per week, it overtook beef around 1990 and continued to rise, reaching approximately 250 grams by 2004. 
Fish consumption was much lower throughout, beginning at around 60 grams and gradually declining to just over 40 grams per person per week.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Quest 1:
The line graph illustrates the proportions of four types of household waste that were recycled in a city during the period between 1992 and 2002.
Overall, recycling rates of paper, glass and cans had an uptrend over the period, while plastic remained the least recycled material throughout the surveyed period.
At first, glass was the most recycled material at just over 18% in 1992 and it demonstrated a steady surge to over 48% in 2002. Paper followed a similar but less dramatic pattern, increasing from around 15% to around 38% in the end.
In contract, cans decreased from over 18% in 1992 to 15% in 1997, but it again raised up to over 28% in 2002.
Plastic was much lower throughout, begining at around 10% and presented a stable pattern in 1997 and 2002, at over 12%.

Quest 2:
The given graph illustrates the amount of visits to a community website during its first and second years of operation.
Overall, the figures of visits in first year tended to increase . Meanwhile, the second year of use showed a down trend.  
At the begining, in the first year, the number of visits rose steadily from July, starting at around 25,000, and reached a peak of approximately 40,000 in October. Although there was a slight decline in November and December, visits increased again to just over 40,000 in February.
After that, a downward trend was observed, with figures falling to about 15,000 in April before rising again to nearly 38,000 in June.
In contrast, the second year showed consistently lower numbers. Visits generally fluctuated between 10,000 and 20,000, peaking at around 21,000 in January. The lowest point was seen in April, at approximately 7,000 visits, followed by a modest recovery towards June.

Quest 4:
The line graph illustrates changes in the total number of four types of fish worldwide between 1982 and 2007.
Overall, Atlantic cod and yellowfin tuna showed a down trend over the period, while haddock and swordfish remained relatively stable. Among the four species, swordfish was consistently the least numerous.
At the start, Atlantic cod had the highest number, at just over 220,000 in 1982. Although it fell to around 150,000 in 1992, it rose slightly later before dropping again to about 135,000 in 2007.
By contrast, yellowfin tuna increased from about 150,000 to nearly 200,000 in 1992. After that, its number went down steadily and reached around 100,000 at the end.
Meanwhile, haddock increased slowly from about 70,000 to just over 75,000, while swordfish stayed low at around 10,000 throughout.

Quest 5:
The given graph show the mean time people in different age groups in New Zealand spent on two leisure activities per day.
Overall, time spent on reading increased with age, while listening to music showed a downward trend over the period.
At the beginning, people aged 14–24 spent the least time on reading, at about 20 minutes per day. This figure rose gradually in older groups, reaching around 35 minutes for those aged 25–32 and about 45–50 minutes among people aged 33–55. The highest amount was seen in the 56–65+ group, at roughly 70 minutes.
In contrast, listening to music showed the opposite pattern. The youngest group spent the most time, at nearly 80 minutes per day. The figure then fell to about 60 minutes in the 25–32 group and reached around 45 minutes among those aged 33–42. After that, it increased again to about 75 minutes in the oldest group.

Quest 6:
The line graph show the feelings of full-time and part-time students about the services of a university library.
Overall, satisfaction with opening hours was high, while opinions about IT support showed a downward trend among part-time students compared with full-time students.
For IT support, most full-time students were happy, with 55% very satisfied and 32% quite satisfied. Only 12% were not satisfied. In contrast, part-time students were less positive, as the largest group (45%) were not satisfied at all, while only 20% were very satisfied.
Regarding opening hours, both groups gave positive opinions. Among full-time students, almost all were satisfied, with 67% very satisfied. Similarly, most part-time students were happy, as 72% reported being very satisfied and only a small number were unhappy

quest 7:
The table compares the proportions of women in parliament and in management positions in five countries in 2000.
Overall, the figures for women in management had an uptrend, while the percentages of women in parliament showed a downward trend in five countries.
In terms of parliament, Norway ranked first, with 36% of seats held by women, followed by Canada at 28%. Much lower figures were recorded in Trinidad and Tobago (19%) and Italy (10%), while Uruguay had the lowest proportion, at just 8%.
By contrast, the percentages of women in management were higher across all countries. Italy had the highest figure, at 54%, closely followed by Norway with 52%. Canada and Uruguay both stood at 37%, whereas Trinidad and Tobago recorded 40%.

Quest 8:
The give graph compare how men and women in the UK spent time on unpaid activities in 2008, measured in minutes per day.
Overall, time spent by women on household work showed an upward trend, while men spent more time on leisure activities, which showed a higher level rather than a downward trend compared with women.
According to the table, men spent more time on TV, video and radio (137 minutes) than women (118 minutes). Time spent on reading was almost the same for both genders, at around 18–19 minutes, while men spent slightly more time on sport.
The bar chart shows clear differences in household tasks. Women spent much more time on cooking and washing, at about 75 minutes, compared with around 30 minutes for men. Women also spent more time on shopping and clothes washing, while men spent more time on repair work.

Quest 10:
The line graph shows the amount of users of fixed telephone lines and mobile phone networks in Africa during the period between 1994 and 2004.
Overall, the use of mobile phones showed a strong upward trend, while fixed telephone lines had a slow upward trend over the period.
At the begining, fixed telephone lines were used by about 1.7 people per 100, whereas mobile phones were almost unused, at around 0.06. The number of fixed-line users increased gradually, reaching just over 3 per 100 people by 2004.
By contrast, mobile phone use rose much faster. After a slow increase in the late 1990s, it grew sharply from 1999, overtook fixed lines in the early 2000s, and reached nearly 9 users per 100 people at the end of the period.

quest 11:
The line graph depicts the proportions of people working in five industries in Australia from 1962 to 2012.
Overall, employment in the service sector showed an upward trend, while the figures for manufacturing, agriculture and other industries had a downtrend over the period.
At the begining, Services was the highest workforce, started at just over 51% in 1962 and it steadily increased to 80% in 2012.
However, construction and Mining stayed extremely low, each remain below 10% during the period.
In contract, Manufacturing decreased over the 50-year period. starting with over 26% , and it continued to dropping to 10% in 2012.
Adriculture followed a similar but less pattern, falling from 10% to over 5% over the period.

Quest 12:
The bar chart illustrates the proportion of people living in urban areas in different regions of the world in 1950 and 2000, with a projection for 2030.
Overall, the proportion of urban residents showed an upward trend over time. Latin America had the highest level of urbanisation throughout the period, while Africa and Asia remained less urbanised despite significant growth.
At the beginning of the period in 1950, Latin America was the most urbanised region, with about 40% of its population living in cities. The global average stood at approximately 30%. In contrast, Africa and Asia had much lower figures, at around 10% and just over 10% respectively.
By contrast, in 2000 and 2030, the percentages increased in every region. Latin America rose to about 70% in 2000 and is expected to reach 80% in 2030. The world figure also increased to nearly 50% and is predicted to reach around 60%. Although Africa and Asia started lower, both are expected to grow to more than 50% by 2030.

Quest 13: 
The table depicts the amountof adults and children who took part in a wildlife survey in Britain fromm 2001 to 2009.
Overall, the total number of people taking part in the wildlife survey showed an upward trend, despite some small changes in the middle years. While the number of adults experienced a slight downward trend towards the end of the period.
At the beginning, in 2001, a total of 48,000 people took part in the survey. Most of them were adults, at 36,000, while only 12,000 were children. In 2003, the total number increased greatly to 248,000, mainly because adult participation rose to 212,000.
By contrast, in the later years, participation reached much higher levels. In 2005 and 2007, the total number stayed stable at just over 360,000, with adults remaining the main group. However, in 2009, the number of children increased dramatically to 270,000, equal to the number of adults, which led to the highest total figure of 540,000.

Quest 14:
The line graph depicts the cost of bananas in four countries, namely Japan, France, Germany and the USA, between 1996 and 2004.
Overall, the cost of bananas in Japan and Germany followed an upward trend , although Japan had large changes and Germany experienced a short downward trend. France remained stable, while the USA had almost no upward.
At the beginning of the period, banana costs in Japan and France were about 2 dollars per kilogram. Germany started lower, at around 1.5 dollars, while the USA had the lowest cost, at about 1 dollar. During the late 1990s, costs in Japan rose sharply, while Germany saw a slight downward trend.
By contrast, in the later years, banana costs in Japan continued to fluctuate and ended at around 2.5 dollars in 2004. Germany increased gradually to nearly 2 dollars before falling slightly. France showed small changes but stayed close to 2 dollars, whereas the cost in the USA remained almost unchanged throughout the period.

Quest 15:
The bar charts depicts the proportions of men and women aged 60–64 who were in employment in Belgium, the USA, Japan and Indonesia between 1970 and 2000.
Overall, employment rates for both men and women showed a clear downward trend in all four countries between 1970 and 2000. Despite this decline, men consistently had higher employment levels than women in both years.
At the beginning, in 1970, employment rates for men were high in every country, reaching over 80% in the USA and Indonesia. Belgium and Japan also recorded figures of around 75–80%. For women, the USA had the highest rate at nearly 80%, while Japan had the lowest at just over 50%.
By contrast, in 2000, employment levels were much lower. Male employment fell to about 50% in Belgium and around 60–75% elsewhere. Female employment decreased more sharply, particularly in Belgium, where it dropped to below 10%, while the other countries remained between roughly 45% and 60%.

Quest 16: 
The line graph illustrates different sources of air pollution in the United Kingdom between 1990 and 2005.
Overall, total air pollution and pollution from industry showed a clear downtrend, while transport experienced a slight upward trend.
In 1990, industry was the largest source, at about 5.5 million tonnes, followed by total air pollutants at around 7 million tonnes. Both figures fell sharply over time, reaching approximately 2 million tonnes for industry and 3 million tonnes in total by 2005.
By contrast, pollution from transport increased slightly from just under 1 million tonnes to about 1.1 million tonnes. Households showed a strong downtrend, decreasing from nearly 1 million tonnes in 1990 to almost zero by the end of the period.

Quest 17: 
The bar chart depicts the amount of people who applied to migrate to Australia in four popular occupations between 2009 and 2012. Figures are given in thousands.
Overall, the number of accountants and software engineers showed an uptrend, while cooks experienced a slight fluctuation followed by a downtrend. Computer programmers remained the least popular group, although their numbers rose gradually.
In detail, accountants recorded the highest figures in all years. Their numbers increased sharply from about 20 thousand in 2009 to nearly 28 thousand in 2010, before showing a downtrend to just over 20 thousand by 2012.
For software engineers, there was a clear uptrend from around 19 thousand in 2009 to approximately 21 thousand in 2011, followed by a fall to about 17 thousand in 2012. Cooks showed minor changes, rising slightly in 2010, then declining to roughly 16 thousand at the end of the period.
Finally, computer programmers increased steadily from about 2 thousand to nearly 5 thousand, despite remaining the smallest group.

Quest 18:
The table and line graph depicts information about cinema attendance and the average amount of cinema visits by different age groups in Australia from 1994 to 2002.
Overall, cinema attendance showed a slight uptrend with fluctuations, while visit frequency followed a downtrend after 1996 before becoming stable. Across all years, people aged 14–24 visited cinemas the most, whereas the 50+ group had the lowest figures despite a gradual uptrend at the end.
According to the table, the percentage of people going to the cinema rose from 67% in 1994 to 72% in 1996 and 1998, then showed a small downtrend to 70% in 2000, before returning to 72% in 2002. In contrast, visit frequency peaked at 11.3 times in 1996 and then declined to around 8.3–8.4 times in later years.
From the graph, all age groups experienced a sharp downtrend in 1998. After that, visits by the 14–24 and 25–34 groups showed a clear uptrend, while older groups recovered more slowly. The 35–49 group remained relatively low, although it increased slightly by 2002.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
23/2: Major world religions
1.Christianity
ORIGIN:
 - began in the 1st century CE (A.D)
 - founded on the teachings of jesus christ
 - started in the roman province of judea ( modern-day middle east)
MAIN IDEA:
 - there is one god
 - jesus is the son of god and savior
 - salation ( being saved ) comes through faith and grace : you must believe in god

Important points:
---------------------------------
test 705: 
1. why canada want immigrant settlement
- housing problem: east : full -> west
- unpopulated land = wheat production for easten canada

2. bolster : improve
   secure= protect
   enacted= make st effective (a law) 
    egistration = sign up
    ==> gv step 
- purchased - buy land from 
- dominian land act : ten dollar fees + miner improvement + 3 years = 160 acres of free land 
- mounted police force : secure the area for settlers --> 1876 : lived in the west --> major post: Swan River, Fort Saskatchewan, Fort Calgary, Fort Walsh and Fort Macleod.
 ==> attracted astern Canadian + European + American settlers, especially to Manitoba

3.Railway & protection
 aim : protect Canadian land + connect British Columbia
- solution:
bring Eastern Canadian & British settlers
build transcontinental railway
- railway effects:
create east–west economy
West → food for East

East → manufactured goods for West

4. Growth of Winnipeg
- land speculation
- housing growth
- chosen as major stop of Canadian Pacific Railway (1881)
  ==> Winnipeg became metropolis of the West
results:
- land boom (1881–1883)
- hamlets → towns (Portage la Prairie, Brandon)
- population increase
Winnipeg:
- railway junction
- many railway jobs
- main processor of farm products

5. Settlers & border security
-early settlers: British & Ontario Protestants
later: Austria-Hungary, Ukraine
-settlement helped protect 49th parallel
Red River mostly Métis & First Nations

6. Why many left Canada
economic depression → low exports
strong competition from US & others
many moved to American frontier
departures > arrivals

7. City problems & rural ideal
-cities had slums & poor living conditions
reformers supported rural farming life
-farming = moral, healthy, family-based
1/3 Canadians worked in agriculture

8. How Canada attracted immigrants
free/cheap land, agents, bonuses, pamphlets
letters home = most effective
letters success → encouraged migration
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
26/2: Listening
Must be good
good afternoon, i do not. an hour ago
he what happened in brussels?
most of them we he 's a stone.
he was being groom for
until 4 years later,
he has no country he has no political
he 's offline
smell likes humis
why i 'm here
i can tell you one man 
he want him i want him
you have my attention
i 'll give you zamari 0but from this point forward
it's my first day we 're out of milk
You heard me right?
i don't got no regret
i think i 'm forgetting st
we want a family. we are going to have a family
i need you to come with me right away
am i getting right? can you tell us what's going on
an i can tell you they 're fine
do me a favor. what is he looking for
they think i'm 

Like most of kids who raised themselves, i can display narcissistic behavior = i like to be alone

i can be withdrawn
i can rewrite my passs. if you need anything .remember
what a pleasure. 
i 'm here. you got rig of your hightlight
tell me about zanami
it's my first day,within a hour, he wants to be out of the country
i'm criminal. but if anyone give me a second chance, it's you
about to capture zamani
are you close? put me on a case you callled in the i know we had an appointment. this whole day is 
if we gonna go through with it, it's the only thing that matter
we have a situation. we don't want to scare the kids
this lady needs to speak to you
you don't have to who made th call?
i told that all i knew
how about a trade? i've noticed how you stroke it
may i see it? the girl
like a criminal. shall i show you
i haven't seen him in years
last two years. he 's most likely mmoving the money
what about the chemist? make it personal. dying makes him dangerous
posoning the village. he wants revenge
deliver the bomb. he 'll know where to find the chemist
staying in my favourite hotels. tip the gettlement
i get out of here and clean my hands
i tell him figure out my hands
it's gonna be oky. you saved me payment for services
what else you know about my plan? you're not smart
what do you choose? calm down and tell me what happened
i 'm not your partner. he talked about you 
the truth is, or i let you die right here
you 'll never know about my husband
it's good to see you , good friend.like you asked?
this is much more than a girl. you gotta move
what did you see? you're closing to him. it was a stamp.
he should be right behind you . are you alone. hands in the air.
step down on the ledge. son of the bitch.
can  you stop it? i was scared when i was your age.
what does it do? it makes me brave.you 're a brave girl.
that is a chemical weapon.he's got the bomb. we 're gonna be a great team. that 't the price of doing business.
this was never about zamani. i think we 're finished. on the list, we have your own list.
i 'm talking about the criminal who matter. i never sleep in a place for 2 nights in 
i speak with only elliza,...

READINGS 702: 
A.
 beetle :
 larvae:
infant form of the beetle:
 Modern pesticides:
 arsenic:
 pest:
Damage done by pests and preventions method 
- weaken and kill sugar cane ( roots: eaten) --> seriouse economic consequences
-solution: 
        chemicals ( arsenic and copper) : cheap + poisonous to ppl plants animals
--> need cheaper and safer methods

B.
The Idea of Biological Control:
--> use wasps and flies +  insect-eating birds + plants  --> destroy resident pests
Examples: 19th :france toads : despite no evidence 
          20th: French sugar cane farmers took giant toads from South America to control pests
scientists carried these toard to Hawaii +  Puerto Rico

C.The origin and development of Biological Control
--> 1926:prevention of catus by a moth from agentia
biological control = sugar can problems
Ex : South American toads : cane toads

D. Toads = not good solution
--> cane toads ( hawai --> australia) = not good <-- cane toads can't eat flying adult beetles --> baby beetles -> eat sugar cane 

E. The Warning Everyone Ignored
--> cane toads : a pest as rabbits --> Other scientists rebuked him + branded his views 'decidedly pessimistic'
    ---> a hundred million cane toads form a toxic infestation ( nowadays)

F.A Danger to Australian Wildlife
Cane toads : large + heavily built amphibians --> contains 14 different chemicals--> no death 
BUT : freshwater crocodiles, goannas (large lizards) and dingoes (wild dogs) <-- eating cane toads
      Cane toads : compete with native Australian fauna for food + eat the eggs and young of ground-nesting birds

G. A Hard Lesson Learned
--> The Error: Everyone agreed to bring the toads without actually testing them first.
--> The Unplanned Effects: Because they didn't test, they didn't realize the toads would hurt the environment.
--> The Warning: The text warns that we could make the same mistake again if we aren't careful.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2/3 : ART -traditional art vs modern art
Part 1: types of art
Art is a form of human expression that communicates ideas, emotions and stories.
there are 4 major categories of art:
 1. visual art
 2.applied art
 3.performing art
 4.literacy art
this lesson focuses mainly on visual arts, but the other categories are briefly explained for context.
1. visual art  "mona lisa " 
 - the painting of a women who profession is a prosititute : woman sex for money 
 - very unique way of drawing 
 - ambiguous ( many ways of understanding it ) 
 - why famous: it was stolen

FRecoes: painting pass through generation
perspectives : new way to look at thing
abstract + symbolic : nobody understand
unconventional technique: new tech that only ppl use
 ===== New caffrey and peter brukle spanish : 
* great art carry broad meanings. it captures time, a place, emotion 
when you strand in front of a word of art .the chaos fades away, you see disciplining. it balances between restraint and abandonment 
 ===== louis lift about ballte
* art gives them disciplining grace ( ) . it embodies emotions. it's breataking in its beauty and it expresses what can't be put into words.

you 're wasting value time. talk to me about containment.
he gonna survie? the why should we truth him? 
you don't run the. there is no deal. 
have you been truthful to the knowledege of you know
give it 20 minutes and wrap it up
he out them there. i wish you were here so you could explain yoursefl.
sixty ppl are dead beacause of you.
the train how did you know? but the train was a big surprise.
i'm not saying anythong unless it's to keeven .
i heard your demand. not a chance. 
tell me about the train wrack.
but you don't know who is the man behind it.
but in truth , there is always more to the story
and you 've never heard of him. 
i don't have an email or a phone aor home adress
you want to make ma an introduction, you must trust me with my resources.
on the other hand. it 's an impossible situation
before we begin, let me to be clear
let's not get ahead of ourselves.
tell me about your job, i am fancinated.
i so wnat to know how you see things.
you 're very comfortable there.
does he know you as you know him?
 why am i so important to you?
now he 's gonna beacause of you.
my contact was the first person i saw when i walked on the stress.
not bad for a day's work
we have a word of you.
i was going through  for a very bad time.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
5/3: the study of time ( horology/ chronology)
 1.normal life
- everthing we know about time is based on something we have yet to prove to the correct

* delve into smt: go deeper into 
- the measurements of change which tends to move in only 1 hour
+ you can only move ( any directions) through space in the presence of time 
+ you have no control over time 
+ you can somehow affect the rate of change what happens

2. a bit deeper into science

TEST 26 : 

Safety Driving Center, hello.
Hello. Can you give me some information about driving lessons?
Yes. There are two courses, one on theory and one practical course,
and most people do the two courses simultaneously.
The first part of the theory course consists of a series of lessons,
and you can do these either at the center in one of our classrooms or via the Internet.
You work through the material at your own pace,
but there's a tutor on hand to help whenever you need it.
At the second stage, we review what we've covered so far.
we do this in the classroom.
We don't deliver it online, so you have to come into the center.
At the end of this lesson, there's a test, but this is just for practice.
It's not a proper RTD test.
If you're satisfied with your performance on this, you can go on to the next stage.
And if you're not, you can go back to stage one and follow the lessons again.
The third stage is the real test, the one set and administered by the RTD.
That's the road traffic department.
Provided you pass that test, you then get your provisional driving license,
which you need before you can venture onto public highways.
The practical course starts off here at the test center,
and it consists of training and assessment on our specially designed circuit.
This allows you to get driving experience immediately, but in a safe environment.
At the next stage, you continue with training and assessment, but on public highways.
Obviously, you can't do this until you've obtained your provisional license
to show that you've got some knowledge of traffic regulations and road safety.
Then, when both you and your instructor think you're ready, you do a trial test.
And if that goes well, you go straight on to do the official test run by the RTD.
Finally, provided that you're successful in both parts of the course, the theory and the practice, you get your driving license.
You're then on probation for a year, and as long as you don't have any problems in that time, your license will be endorsed for future use.
Before you hear the rest of the conversation, you have some time to look at questions 17 to 20.
Quite easy. For the theory course, there's no need to book, and if you're going to do classroom-based lessons, you can just turn up here at the center and pay as you go.
We run six sessions a day, and if you go to our website, you'll find the start times for each session.
If you don't have internet access, you can pick up a leaflet from the center here with that information.
As for the classes themselves, all our theory classes are run by experienced tutors,
and they're offered in a number of different languages as well as in English.
We deliver the content using PowerPoint, but there's still a place for pen and paper tasks,
and we ask you to bring your own stationery to the lessons.
You choose the particular stage of the course that you want each time.
Some people attend more frequently than others,
and so they progress through the course at a faster rate.
What about enrolling on the practical course?
That's a bit more complicated, and you do have to book in advance.
But you can do that via our website or at the customer service desk here at the center,
or you can book at one of our self-service kiosks.
You'll find them in some of the big stores in the city.
So it's very convenient, whatever your situation is.
You can attend between one and seven sessions a week,
so you can decide whether you want to do the course intensively or spread it out more.
some driving schools allow you to drive your own car, but for safety and insurance reasons, we don't.
You can cancel lessons in the same way that you book them,
but in order to avoid incurring a penalty, you have to do that at least 72 hours in advance of your appointment.
When you make a cancellation in less than the required period,
you can try and transfer your session to someone else.
If another trainee then agrees to take the session over,
your payment for the cancelled session can be credited back to your account.
Otherwise, we can't give a refund for any reason,
and even a medical certificate isn't accepted as grounds for granting one.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
9/3:  part 4 test 603
 IT was in the cargo of the ship
incription = the lord of the ring
legibel = can be read

PART 1 READING TEST 711: The Origins of Weather Forecasting
A. The orgirin of the weather forecast
---Aug 1, 1861: First public forecast in The Times -> "General weather probable during next two days" -> started ongoing controversy (people remember failures, not successes).
(First forecast -> Aug 1, 1861 -> The Times -> controversial legacy)
--- Admiral Robert FitzRoy: Head of Meteorological Department -> Britain's "least-known hero" -> brave move because weather prediction = astrology/fortune-telling at the time.
(Robert FitzRoy -> founder of Met Dept -> risky: weather prep seen as a joke/scam) 

B.The Royal Charter Disaster
------ FitzRoy's Background: Faultless reputation -> Captain of HMS Beagle (Charles Darwin's voyage) -> Darwin's Origin of Species connection -> retired Admiral seeking new direction.
(Elite background -> HMS Beagle + Darwin -> retired Navy Admiral)
------ Meteorological Dept: Established June 30, 1854 -> funded by Parliament to chart safe Atlantic routes -> FitzRoy became Chief Statistician -> Government & MPs laughed at the idea of weather reports/forecasts.
(Met Dept 1854 -> goal: safe sailing -> FitzRoy: Chief -> MPs mocked forecasting idea)

C.The Start of Storm Warnings
------ Shift in Focus: Small staff (3 clerks) in London -> FitzRoy bored with transcribing ship reports -> pivoted to preventing loss of life at sea from storms.
(Small office -> bored with data -> priority: saving lives/storm safety)
------ Royal Charter Tragedy (1859): Gale-force winds sank ship near shore -> 430 dead -> national tragedy -> FitzRoy wrote to The Times claiming the storm was predictable.
(1859: Royal Charter disaster -> 430 deaths -> FitzRoy's letter: "this could have been predicted")

D.The Need for Storm Warnings
------ 1859 Fatalities: 1,645 lives lost off British coast -> FitzRoy repeatedly lobbied The Times for a storm-warning service.
(1,645 deaths -> FitzRoy pushed for storm warnings via The Times)
------ Right Timing: Improved weather knowledge + barometer readings -> technological edge: electric telegraph & Morse code (1844) enabled instant communication.
(Perfect timing -> better science + barometers -> telegraph/Morse code = instant data)

E.FitzRoy’s Weather Forecast Service
------ Feb 1861 Innovation: Storm-warning service launched -> standardized instruments for accuracy -> telegraph reports sent daily at fixed times -> detailed weather maps created.
(Storm warnings -> standardized gear -> daily telegraph data -> maps)
------ Safety System: Warnings telegraphed to ports -> flag system hoisted for ships -> lives lost fell by 1/3 (biggest advance since lifeboats) -> FitzRoy became a maritime hero.
(Port flags -> saved lives -> deaths down 33% -> hero to sailors)
------ Public Forecasts: Daily service in The Times (Aug 1861) -> huge attention (including Queen Victoria) -> popular with fishermen (safety) but disliked by vessel owners (delays/lost money).
(Aug 1861 public launch -> Royal interest -> workers happy vs. owners angry at delays)

F.Problems with Early Forecasts
------ Challenges & Backlash: Weather forecasting was technically difficult -> one error led to bad publicity -> inaccurate forecasts triggered "heated correspondence" in The Times.
(Hard to predict -> mistakes = public outcry -> letters of complaint)

G.The Legacy of Weather Forecasting
------ Modern Recognition: FitzRoy was ahead of his time -> now honored as a "towering figure" -> sea area renamed "FitzRoy" in the official shipping forecast.
(Late recognition -> meteorology giant -> sea area namesake)
------ Sacrifice & Legacy: Determination cost his health (died prematurely) -> published a pioneering book on forecasting -> recognized by scientists as a masterpiece of early science.
(Personal cost -> premature death -> book legacy -> scientific validation)

pioneer : the first ppl to do sth
deceptively: lying
controversy: problem flict
predict: say sth about the future
reputation: big name for sth
inevitable: 100% will happen
publication: newspaper
A. before the first public paper forecast
- controvercy: remember the wrong, not the right 
- predict the weather = fortune telling = national a joke
B. fit the  background
-4 plus admiral -> retire -> cheap statistician
-Parliament voted to set up + fund 
-government laugh at the idea
C. early day of weather forecast office
-3 clerks -  transcribing  ships’ reports
- focus more on loss of life
-royal chapter 430 lives = national tragey-> fit -> explain storm : predictable
D.technology advancement
-Knowledge improving
-barometer readings
-electric telegraph
-Morse code
===> instant communication
===> good time for national forecasting services
E.fizz 
-report: unreliable--> standardised instruments for ships--> accurate weather reports ---> detailed weather maps 
-system of flags--> sheeping safety (  lifeboat)
- FitzRoy( hero) --> public weather forecasting service
-queen vistoria --> visit island --> meaasage fishroyal
-FitzRoy:popular with fishermen , hated by vessel owner ( delayed when bad weather)
F.inevible mistake
G.legacy 
-area of sea named after him
-extraordinary determination kill him early 
-published a book
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/3: ### Introduction
- exploring tesla turbine technology
 - tesla turbine technology, a revolutionary concept in egineering introduced by the visionary inventor Nikola tesla
 - the intricate workings of tesla turbines, understanding their unique design principles and applications in the realm of energy conversion and propulsion (put)

1. understanding tesla turbines
boudry layer : outer most layer that can be affected by sth
rotary : egine
adhesion principles: theory of the last layer we stick slayer

how do you know my name? 
this world is dangerous. 
so change how did that
they are the one like you , they call me the flash
what does it mean? 
you 're always follow my roads
it 's the zoom, it's narrow ebhindhim
you have only 1 things. kill the flash
and how did you get your speed?
did you think slap? is that scientist?
is there anything possible to reach the light
this is our earth .this is earth 1.
the others 345 to infinity, 
there is one problem remain.
the dates are over. 
you gave my light to him
i took my leisure. i know he died before i know him
the test for necessary. long my way.
everywhere you can go off.
i don't think that i am very won.
and how , i found st, i think i found sth.
what's that about? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
16/3: Iran and its major conflicts
1. THE long history of iran
iran is one of the oldest civilizations in the world, with a history going back more than, 2500 years
ANCIENTS PERSIA
Iran was once known as persin and was home to powerful empires
Important periods include:
 - the achaaemenid empoires ( 250-350) founded by cyrus the great 
 - the sassanian empire, one of the rome's main rivals
Ancient persia controlled huge ferriocies across the middle east, central asia, and parts of europe
---
persia: a country a fighting
conflicts: wars
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
19/3: DNS 
1. what it is
- domain name service
- a system to translate domain names to ip addresses
- ip addresses are octets (series of 8 numbers)
2. ip addresses
- classless ip addresses: 0.0.0.0 to 255.255.255.255 ( 0 to (28)4) -> too small number
-> public and private ips
- public ips are ips that everyone can see 
- private ips are ips that only devices in the same network can see
Hst17.com        97.74.93.87     01100001. 01001010. 01011101. 01010111
->>>>> translation : done by DNS

3. layers of DNS
- local machine is your computer
- router  such as wifi
- isp (internet service provider: vnpt, fpt, Viettel…) -> google dns 
- regional dns
- root dns
**all the ip translations are kept by the dns records stored in each level
ipconfig /flushdns

4.VPN 
- virtual network provider
- basiclly, it is a group of computers connected to one another.
- Suftshark + browser
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
